Docs(web): Introduce General Changes into the Migration Guide #DS-1489 (#1696)
lmc-eu/spirit-design-system: docs/migrations/web/MIGRATION-v3.md

## Overview

- [General Changes](#general-changes)
  - [Themes](#themes)
  - [Spacing Values](#spacing-values)
  - [Helpers: Typography and Headings](#helpers-typography-and-headings)
  - [Utilities: Removed and New Classes](#utilities-removed-and-new-classes)
  - [Migrating Your Own Components](#migrating-your-own-components)
- [Component Changes](#component-changes)
  - [Button: `square` Modifier Renamed to `symmetrical`](#button-square-modifier-renamed-to-symmetrical)

## General Changes

### Themes

Starting from version 3, the design system now supports multiple themes based on the
theme tokens.

See our [Themes decision][themes-decision] for more information and why we decided to implement this feature.

#### Introduction

The design system now supports multiple themes based on the theme tokens. As in
[Figma][spirit-figma-file], where the first theme column is the default, the first theme in the

> tokens map `@themes` is the default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`@themes` tokens map is the default.
```

We use CSS variables to apply colors to the components. This way, we can easily switch
the theme by adding a CSS class to the root element. This change affects all nested components
that apply any color.

The default theme is set to the `:root` element and all the themes are generated
to CSS classes that can be applied to the any element. Their names are based on the

> theme names in tokens.

Reviewer: I still think this can be more straightforward:

1. introduce CSS variables on the root element, nothing about switching
2. introduce CSS classes that can be applied on any element

#### Component Changes

We did all the work and our components are now using CSS variables to
apply colors.

> Also, all your components or any custom styles you have, that previously used

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Also, all your components or any custom styles you have that previously used
```

> color tokens should be updated to use CSS variables.
> 
> See [Migrating Your Own Components](#migrating-your-own-components) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
color tokens should be updated to use CSS variables. See [Migrating Your Own Components](#migrating-your-own-components) for more information.
```

More font weights are now available for headings.
Rename `text` to `bold` in the `heading` helpers.

For example:

- `.typography-heading-xlarge-text` → `.typography-heading-xlarge-bold`
- `.typography-heading-xsmall-text` → `.typography-heading-xsmall-bold`

### Utilities: Removed and New Classes

Some utility classes were removed and new ones were added.

Removed utility classes:

- `.text-brand-primary`
- `.text-brand-secondary`
- `.bg-basic`
- `.bg-cover`
- `.bg-inverted`

New utility classes:

- `.text-tertiary`
- `.bg-primary`
- `.bg-secondary`
- `.bg-tertiary`

### Migrating Your Own Components

First, you need to update your design tokens. You can either use Supernova to export
your design tokens in new structure, or you can manually update your tokens, or update
our tokens package if you are using it.

Here are the steps to migrate your own components to use the new design tokens and themes:

1. If you load `foundation`, `components`, `helpers`, and `utilities` separately, you need
   to `@forward 'themes'` before them in your main SCSS file. If you load the whole `scss` folder,
   you don't need to do anything.

> 2. Replace module load `@use '@tokens' as tokens;` in your components with `@use '@global' as global-tokens;`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Replace module load `@use '@tokens' as tokens;` in your components with `@use '@global-tokens' as global-tokens;`.
```

3. Rename all the tokens in your components to use the new structure.

>    1. Replace all module name `tokens.*` → `global-tokens.*`.

Reviewer: I didn't notice this before. What does it mean? 🤔

Author: updated

>    2. Replace all spacing tokens with new values. See [Spacing values](#spacing-values) for more information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   2. Replace all spacing tokens with new values. See [Spacing Values](#spacing-values) for more information.
```

>    3. Replace all radius tokens with new values. We added new a radius token in between, so you need to update them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   3. Replace all radius tokens with new values. We added a new radius token in between, so you need to update all of them.
```

   4. Replace all typography tokens with new values. We removed the `text` infix from typography tokens and added emphasized headings.

>    5. Switch all color tokens to use CSS variables. Use the `token-prefix` tokens to set prefix. // TODO update this after implementing DS-1493

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   5. Switch all color tokens to use CSS variables. Use the `token-prefix` token to set the prefix. // TODO update this after implementing DS-1493
```

## Overview

- [General Changes](#general-changes)
  - [Themes](#themes)
  - [Spacing values](#spacing-values)
  - [Helpers: Typography `text` infix and Heading emphasis](#helpers-typography-text-infix-and-heading-emphasis)
  - [Utilities: Removed and new classes](#utilities-removed-and-new-classes)
  - [Migrating product components](#migrating-product-components)
- [Component Changes](#component-changes)
  - [Button: renamed modifier `square`](#button-square-modifier-renamed-to-symmetrical)

## General Changes

## Themes

Starting from version 3, the design system now supports multiple themes based on the

> theme tokens. As in Figma, the first theme is the default one.

Reviewer 2: "As in Figma" - link to the Figma documentation where it is described will be handy.

The default theme is set to the `:root` element and all the themes are generated
to classes that can be applied to the any element. Their names are based on the
theme names in tokens.

This change affects all components that apply any color.

We did all the work and our components are now using CSS variables to
apply colors, however, if you have any custom styles you need to update them.

Also, all your components that previously used color tokens should be updated to
use CSS variables. See [Migrating product components](#migrating-product-components)
for more information.

To switch the theme, simply add the theme class to the element you want to apply the theme to.
All the colors in the nested component will be switched to the theme colors.

Using themes we were able to remove `inverted` variants and some `brand` tokens.

See our [Themes decision][themes-decision] for more information and why we decided to implement this feature.

### Spacing values

> New spacing values were added to the design system this caused a change in the
> spacing tokens and some values were updated.
> 
> All spacing props and utility classes are influenced by this change.

Reviewer: I think this can be said in one sentence:

```suggestion
New spacing values were added to the design system, updating spacing design tokens and affecting all spacing props and utility classes.
```

Or something like that.

#### Migration Guide

Use this table to update the spacing tokens in your project.

| **Old tokens** |      | **New tokens** |      |
| -------------- | ---- | -------------- | ---- |
| space-0        | 0    | space-0        | 0px  |
| space-100      | 1px  | space-100      | 1px  |
| space-200      | 2px  | space-200      | 2px  |
| space-300      | 4px  | space-300      | 4px  |

> |                |      | space-400      | 6px  |

Reviewer: How about putting the px column first?

```md
|       | **Old tokens** | **New tokens** |
| ----- | -------------- | -------------- |
| 0     | space-0        | space-0        |
| 1 px  | space-100      | space-100      |
| 2 px  | space-200      | space-200      |
| 4 px  | space-300      | space-300      |
| 6 px  | —              | space-400      |
```

| space-400      | 8px  | space-500      | 8px  |
| space-500      | 12px | space-600      | 12px |
| space-600      | 16px | space-700      | 16px |
|                |      | space-800      | 20px |
| space-700      | 24px | space-900      | 24px |
| space-800      | 32px | space-1000     | 32px |
| space-900      | 40px | space-1100     | 40px |
| space-1000     | 48px | space-1200     | 48px |
|                |      | space-1300     | 56px |
| space-1100     | 64px | space-1400     | 64px |
|                |      | space-1500     | 72px |
| space-1200     | 80px | space-1600     | 80px |
|                |      | space-1700     | 96px |

> If you are going to use fulltext search&replace in your project, we suggest you to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are going to use fulltext search-and-replace in your project, we suggest you to
```

? 🤷🏻

start from the largest values and work your way down to the smallest ones.
This way you will avoid replacing values you already replaced.

> ### Helpers: Typography `text` infix and Heading emphasis

Reviewer: Maybe this is just fine?

```suggestion
### Helpers: Typography and Headings
```

As the word `text` was omitted from the typography tokens, the typography helpers
were updated to reflect this change. Also, the `heading` helpers were updated to
support the emphasis.

#### Migration Guide

> From `body` typography helpers remove the `text` infix.

Reviewer: SWOMPT please 🇬🇧 

```suggestion
Remove the `text` infix from `body` typography helpers.
```

For example:

- `.typography-body-large-text-bold` → `.typography-body-large-bold`
- `.typography-body-xsmall-text-regular` → `.typography-body-xsmall-regular`

> Rename `text` to `bold` in the `heading` helpers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
More font weights are now available for headings.
Rename `text` to `bold` in the `heading` helpers.
```

For example:

- `.typography-heading-xlarge-text` → `.typography-heading-xlarge-bold`
- `.typography-heading-xsmall-text` → `.typography-heading-xsmall-bold`

### Utilities: Removed and new classes

Some utility classes were removed and new ones were added.

Removed utility classes:

- `.text-brand-primary`

> - `.text-brand-secondary`

Reviewer: This may change yet.

Author: it may

- `.bg-basic`
- `.bg-cover`
- `.bg-inverted`

New utility classes:

- `.text-tertiary`
- `.bg-primary`
- `.bg-secondary`
- `.bg-tertiary`

> ### Migrating product components

Reviewer 2: Title Case, please.

Reviewer: … in all headings please 🙏🏻.

Reviewer: And maybe more clearly like this?

```suggestion
### Migrating Your Own Components
```

> First, you need to update your tokens. You can either use Supernova to export
> your tokens in new structure, or you can manually update your tokens or update
> our tokens package if you are using it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, you need to update your design tokens. You can either use Supernova to export
your design tokens in new structure, or you can manually update your tokens, or update
our tokens package if you are using it.
```

> Here are some steps to migrate your product components to use the new tokens and themes:
> 
> 1. If you load `foundation`, `components`, `helpers`, and `utilities` separately, you need
>    add `@forward 'themes';` before them in your main file. If you load whole `scss` folder,
>    you don't need to do anything.
> 2. Replace module load `@use '@tokens' as tokens;` in your components with `@use '@global' as global-tokens;`.
> 3. Rename all the tokens in your components to use the new structure.
>    1. Replace all module name `tokens.*` → `global-tokens.*`.
>    2. Replace all spacing tokens with new values. See [Spacing values](#spacing-values) for more information.
>    3. Replace all radius tokens with new values. We added new radius token in between, so you need to update them.
>    4. Replace all typography tokens with new values. We removed `text` infix from typography tokens and added emphasized headings.
>    5. Switch all color tokens to use CSS variables. You can use `globals` settings module to load prefix.
>    6. If you used `$border-style` tokens, you need to replace them with direct values.
>    7. If you used `$focus` token, you need to replace it with `$focus-ring` token.
>    8. If you used `$grid-gutter` tokens, you need to replace them with `$grid-spacing` tokens.
> 4. That's it! You should now have your components updated to use the new tokens and themes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here are the steps to migrate your own components to use the new design tokens and themes:

1. If you load `foundation`, `components`, `helpers`, and `utilities` separately, you need
   to `@forward 'themes'` before them in your main SCSS file. If you load the whole `scss` folder,
   you don't need to do anything.
2. Replace module load `@use '@tokens' as tokens;` in your components with `@use '@global' as global-tokens;`.
3. Rename all the tokens in your components to use the new structure.
   1. Replace all module name `tokens.*` → `global-tokens.*`.
   2. Replace all spacing tokens with new values. See [Spacing values](#spacing-values) for more information.
   3. Replace all radius tokens with new values. We added new a radius token in between, so you need to update them.
   4. Replace all typography tokens with new values. We removed the `text` infix from typography tokens and added emphasized headings.
   5. Switch all color tokens to use CSS variables. You can use the `globals` settings module to load the global prefix.
   6. If you used `$border-style` tokens, you need to replace them with direct values (`solid`, `dashed`, etc.).
   7. If you used the `$focus` token, you need to replace it with the `$focus-ring` token.
   8. If you used `$grid-gutter` tokens, you need to replace them with equivalent `$grid-spacing` tokens.
4. That's it! You should now have your components updated to use the new design tokens and themes. 🎉 
```

> 3. Rename all the tokens in your components to use the new structure.

Can we add a link to point the users to the guide?

> 3. Replace all radius tokens with new values. We added new a radius token in between

Can we be more specific? Where can I find the token?

Here is a simple example of how to update your component styles:

Before:

```scss
@use '@tokens' as tokens;

$color: tokens.$text-primary;
$gap: tokens.$space-400;
```

After:

```scss

> @use '@global' as global-tokens;
> @use '@lmc-eu/spirit-web/scss/settings/globals' as globals;

Reviewer: The two "globals" here are a bit confusing, we should think about it again…

This is the minimum, I think:

```suggestion
@use '@global' as global-tokens;
@use '@lmc-eu/spirit-web/scss/settings/globals' as global-settings;
```

BTW, do we want the product to use _our_ globals at all? Shouldn't they apply their own prefix?

Author: 1. Maybe we should rename the `@global` file as we already started to discuss. Maybe `@global-tokens` can be an option.
2. We either want them to use our global-settings or we should do the token prefix more properly. The problem is that settings are in the web package, but we already set the `spirit` prefix in the exporter and therefore in the `design-tokens` package. I am talking about shadows and gradients. Maybe if we make the prefix a token and use it everywhere from there, we can make this work and make it configurable. But this might not be easy.
